---
geometry: a4paper
documentclass: article
figPrefix:
  - "Figure"
  - "Figures"
header-includes:
    - \usepackage{setspace}
    - \doublespacing
    - \usepackage{lineno}
    - \linenumbers
author: 
    - Thomas McColgan,\footnote{Department of Biology, Institute of Theoretical Biology, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Berlin, Germany}
    - Ji Liu,\footnote{Department of Biology, University of Maryland, College Park, MD, USA}
    - Paula T Kuokkanen,\footnotemark[1] \footnotemark[2]
    - Catherine E Carr,\footnotemark[2]
    - Hermann Wagner,\footnote{Institute for Biology II, RWTH Aachen, Aachen, Germany}
    - Richard Kempter\footnotemark[1]


title: Dipolar\ extracellular\ potentials generated\ by\ axonal\ projections


abstract: Extracellular field potentials (EFPs) are an important source of information in neuroscience, but their physiological basis is in many cases still a matter of debate. Axonal sources are typically discounted in modeling and data analysis because their contributions are assumed to be negligible. Here, we showed experimentally and theoretically that contributions of axons to EFPs can be significant. Modeling action potentials propagating along axons, we showed that EFPs were prominent in the presence of a terminal zone where axons branch and terminate in close succession, as found in many brain regions. Our models predicted a dipolar far field and a polarity reversal at the center of the terminal zone. We confirmed these predictions using EFPs from the barn owl auditory brainstem where we recorded in nucleus laminaris using a multielectrode array. These results demonstrate that axonal terminal zones produce EFPs with considerable amplitude and spatial reach.
...

Introduction
==============
Extracellular field potentials (EFPs) are at the heart of many experimental
approaches used to examine the inner workings of the brain. Types of EFPs include
invasively recorded signals such as the electrocorticogram (ECoG), the local field
potential (LFP), the current source density (CSD), and the multiunit activity (MUA) as
well as the noninvasively recorded electroencephalogram (EEG) and the auditory
brainstem response (ABR) [@Brette2012Handbook; @Nunez2006Electric]. The origins
of these signals, especially in cases in which the activity is not clearly
attributable to a single cell, is a matter of debate [@Buzsaki2012Origin].

EFPs in the brain were long thought to be primarily of synaptic origin
[@Buzsaki2012Origin]. As a consequence, many modeling studies focussed on the
extracellular fields induced by postsynaptic currents on the dendrites and the soma
of a neuron [@Holt1999Electrical;
@Einevoll2013Modelling; @Linden2011Modeling; @Linden2010Intrinsic;
@FernandezRuiz2013Cytoarchitectonic]. However, a number of recent data analyses
and modeling efforts have revealed that active, non-synaptic membrane currents
can play an important role in generating population-level EFPs [@Reimann2013Biophysically;
@Anastassiou2015Cell; @Schomburg2012Spiking; @Ray2011Different;
@Belluscio2012CrossFrequency; @Waldert2013Influence; @Ness2016Active], including far reaching potentials detectable at
the scalp [@Telenczuk2011Highfrequency; @Telenczuk2015Correlates].
Currents from the axon are still thought to be so small as to be of minor
importance for the EFP.

One of the reasons for the assumption that axonal currents contribute little to
the EFP is that the far field of an action potential traveling along an
idealized straight axon is quadrupolar, meaning that it decays faster with
distance than synaptic sources, which are typically dipolar
[@Nunez2006Electric]. Surprisingly, theoretical [@Tenke1993Interpretation] and experimental studies indicated that
the EFP of axonal responses may also have a dipolar structure. For example,
@Blot2014Ultrarapid reported an EFP with a characteristic dipolar structure in
the vicinity of cerebellar Purkinje cell axons; other studies
[@Swadlow2002Activation;@Swadlow2000Influence] showed that the axonal part of
the EFP of thalamocortical afferents showed a polarity reversal associated
with a dipolar source, and classical current source density studies found
dipolar current distributions in axonal terminal zones in the cortex and
lateral geniculate nucleus, and attributed these to axons because of
conduction velocities [@Mitzdorf1978Prominent;@Mitzdorf1985Current;@Mitzdorf1977Laminar;see also @Tenke1993Interpretation]. Here we show a strong dipolar, axonal field potential from the
auditory brainstem of the barn owl.

The discrepancy between the quadrupolar structure of EFPs generated by
idealized axons, and the experimentally observed
dipolar structure raises the question of how axons are able to generate
dipolar field potentials. We show how dipolar far fields in the EFP of axons
can be explained by the axons' anatomical structure. In particular, the branchings and terminations of axons in their terminal zone area deform the extracellular waveform [@Gydikov1986Influence;@Gydikov1986Extracellular;@Plonsey1977Action], and can lead
to a dipolar EFP structure. Axon bundles, sometimes called 
fascicles, exist throughout the peripheral and central nervous system and have such terminal zones [@kandel2000principles; @Hentschel1999Models; @Nornes1972Temporal;
@Goodman1984Cell]. The white matter of the mammalian brain can be viewed as an
agglomeration of such fascicles [@Schuz2002Human]. We therefore predict
pronounced contributions of axon bundles to EFPs, which are neglected in
current models.

In what follows, axonal contributions to the EFP  are first
investigated by a numerical model based on forward simulation
[@Holt1999Electrical; @Gold2006Origin]. This first model includes a large-scale
multi-compartment simulation [@Jack75Electric;@Rall1959Branching;@Abbott1992Simple;@Hines1997NEURON;@Hines2009NEURON] of an axon population. We then outline the basic
mechanisms by means of a second, analytically tractable, model of a generic
axon bundle. Finally, we validate model predictions with data from multi-site
in-vivo electrophysiological recordings from the barn owl auditory brain stem.

Results
==============

Effects of axonal bifurcations and terminations on extracellular action potentials
----

To understand how the geometry of an axon affects the extracellular waveform
associated with action potentials, we first numerically simulated single action
potentials propagating along generic axons and calculated their contribution to
the EFP (for details, see Materials and Methods). This was done for five
scenarios: infinite axons, terminating axons, bifurcating axons, axons that
bifurcate as well as terminate, and axon bundles ([@fig:simpletree]). We began by simulating an
infinitely long axon following a straight line path, neither bifurcating nor
terminating ([@fig:simpletree]A). The extracellular action potential has the
characteristic triphasic shape. As the action potential travels from top to
bottom, the waveform is translated in time with the conduction velocity, but is
otherwise unchanged. The triphasic shape is also present in the spatial
arrangement of currents at any given time, which is the reason for the
quadrupolar EFP response traditionally assumed for axons.

![Relationship between axon morphology and extracellular potential.
Multi-compartment simulations of action potentials traveling along axons with
varying morphologies, as indicated by the diagram on the left-hand side of each
subfigure. Action potential propagation direction indicated by arrow.
Waveforms, shown on the right-hand side of each subfigure, were recorded at a
horizontal distance of 150\ µm from the axons. The vertical depth is indicated
by the plot position, spaced by 200\ µm. Horizontal distances between axons are for
illustration only, all axons were simulated to lie on a straight line. (**A**)
Action potential in an infinitely long, straight axon. (**B**) Terminating
axon. Action potential waveform closest to the termination thickened for
emphasis. (**C**) Branching axon. The axon branches multiple times within of
200\ µm. Thicker waveform at the center of the bifurcation zone.  (**D**)
Combined bifurcations and terminations. Note the larger voltage scales in C
and D, which correspond to the different number of fibers. (**E**) Response in
a population of 100 randomized morphologies, three of which are shown
schematically (colored). Activity consists of spontaneous background activity
(100 spikes/s) superimposed with a brief Gaussian pulse of heightened spike
rate (2000 spikes/s). Spike rate and example spike times for the three
morphologies are shown at the top. Right: gray lines show activity of full
population averaged over 40 trials, while the black lines show the low-pass (<1
kHz) component. Note that the time and voltage scales are different from A-D.
](../figs/fig_1_nocsd.pdf){#fig:simpletree}

There are two ways of understanding the triphasic shape of the extracellular
waveform. One way is by attribution of the peaks of the response to individual
current types. The first, small positive peak corresponds to the capacitive
current, the large and negative second peak to the sodium current, and the
final positive peak to the potassium current [@Gold2006Origin]. Another, more
mathematical way of understanding the triphasic shape is specific to the nature
of the axon. Due to Kirchhoff's law and cable theory (see Materials and
Methods), the local transmembrane current in a homogeneous axon is proportional to the
second spatial derivative of the membrane potential along the direction of the
axon. Because the action potential is roughly a traveling wave, the currents
are also proportional to the second *temporal* derivative of the membrane
potential. The three extrema of the EFP are thus related to the points of
maximum curvature in the action potential waveform, namely the onset, the
maximum, and the end of the spike.

Next we simulated the response of an axon that terminates ([@fig:simpletree]B).
Here the action potential approaching the recording location (top traces) has the same, triphasic
EFP response as in the non-branching case. When the action potential reaches the
termination point, its EFP gradually deforms into a biphasic response, with
a positive peak preceding a negative peak. The mechanism for this deformation
can be understood as follows: As the action potential approaches the recording
location next to the termination, the majority of the transmembrane currents
flow at points located before the termination, and they are almost identical to
those in the non-terminating case; the first, capacitive peak is not affected. As already
mentioned, the second and third peaks of the extracellular action potential in
the non-terminating case are generated by currents close to or after the
electrode location. In the terminating axon, there are no currents at points
after the termination, leading to a partial suppression of the second peak and
a complete suppression of the third peak.

Another generic structure found in axons is a bifurcation. To emphasize the
impact of bifurcations, we simulated a single axon that bifurcates three times
on each branch within a distance of 200 µm, leading to a total number of
8 collaterals leaving the bifurcation zone ([@fig:simpletree]C). Note that in
order to avoid confounding effects, the horizontal distances between axons in
[@fig:simpletree]C-E are for illustration only; all collaterals were simulated
to lie on a straight line. The EFP far away from the bifurcation zone has
a triphasic shape and resembles the one observed in [@fig:simpletree]A, and the
amplitude is proportional to the number of axon fibers. The EFP near the
bifurcation zone has a biphasic shape. Although there is an initial tiny
positive peak, the response is dominated by the second, negative and the third,
positive peak. This waveform can again be understood by comparison to the first
example ([@fig:simpletree]A) containing the infinitely long axon: The tiny
positive initial peak resembles the infinite case, because it is constituted by the action
potential-related currents flowing within the part of the axon before the
bifurcation. As the action potential passes the bifurcation zone, there are now
several action potentials (one in each fiber). Because of the active nature of
the action potential, the active currents are the same in each outgoing fiber
as in the incoming fiber. This leads the second and third peak to be multiplied
in size, yielding a quasi-biphasic response. We chose to simulate several
bifurcations because this leads to a clearer effect in the EFP. In the case of
a single bifurcation, this effect is also present, but the amplification of the
second and third peak relative to the first peak is not as notable as in this
example.

To understand how bifurcations and terminations interact when they are present
in the same axon, we simulated an axon with an identical number of bifurcations
as in the previous case, but then added terminations to all the fibers 200
µm after the bifurcation zone ([@fig:simpletree]D). We found that this
configuration leads to the same biphasic responses as observed in the cases of
the isolated anatomical features. A triphasic response occurred in-between the
bifurcation and termination zones. A notable point here is that the potential
at the bifurcation and termination are both biphasic and on the same timescale,
but opposite in polarity. 

After having studied the EFPs of single axons, we next started to simulate axon
bundles, because axons often run in parallel bundles in the brain. Moving
towards more biologically plausible axon geometries, we considered axon bundles
consisting of axons with slightly altered spatial arrangement: we randomly
perturbed the precise locations of bifurcations and terminations in the axon
tree ([@fig:simpletree]E, left). We simulated 100 axons and stimulated each
axon with an inhomogeneous Poisson spike train
[@Kuokkanen2010Origin;@Softky1993Highly]. The driving rate of the
inhomogeneous Poisson process was the same for all axons and consisted of
a constant background rate (100\ spikes/s) and a Gaussian pulse of heightened
activity (2000\ spikes/s). The standard deviation of the pulse was 1 ms,
resulting in an additional 3.5 spikes being fired on average over the entire duration of the pulse.
The resulting extracellular population-level waveforms ([@fig:simpletree]E, right) showed
a polarity reversal reminiscent of [@fig:simpletree]D. However, in the
bifurcation zone, the summed contribution from many fibers and action
potentials lead to a monophasic negative peak, and in the termination zone
there was a monophasic positive peak. Interestingly, the summed potential at
the center of the terminal zone largely cancelled out.

The fact that the responses in [@fig:simpletree]E were mostly monophasic can be
explained by the presence of a non-zero bias in the biphasic responses observed
for the single spike responses in [@fig:simpletree]D: close to a bifurcation,
the area under the negative part of the curve slightly exceeded that of the
positive part, and vice versa close to a termination. When summed up over many
spikes with different timings, this difference in areas induced a positive or
negative polarity of the population response in [@fig:simpletree]E.

The reversal behaviour shown in [@fig:simpletree]E is similar to the polarity
reversal associated with a dipole observed in experimental studies
[@Swadlow2000Influence;@Swadlow2002Activation;@Blot2014Ultrarapid]. To
summarize, simple one-dimensional model axon structures can produce complex and
diverse spatiotemporal EFP responses, including monophasic, biphasic and triphasic
waveforms, comparable to experimentally recorded responses.

Axonal projections generate a dipole-like field potential
-----

Dipole-like EFPs have a much larger spatial reach than quadrupolar-like EFPs,
which are typically associated with axons [@Nunez2006Electric]. To further
understand whether and how axons can generate a dipolar EFP, in [@fig:bigtree]
we turned to three-dimensional axon morphologies, in contrast to the
one-dimensional case studied in [@fig:simpletree] (for details, see Materials
and Methods). We thus simulated a parallel fiber bundle of 5000 axons that at
first runs at a constant number of fibers without bifurcations and then reaches a
terminal zone. Within this terminal zone, the fibers first bifurcate, which
increases the number of fibers. Finally, as the axons reach the end of the
terminal zone, they terminate and the number of fibers decreases to zero (example axon shown in
[@fig:bigtree]A). To model more closely the actual axonal structures found in
nature, we included a radial fanning out of the branches as well as a more
diverse set of morphologies with a variable number of bifurcations and
terminations (see Materials and Methods for details).

The spiking activity of a generic axon bundle was simulated by a background
spontaneous firing rate of 100 spikes/s and a short pulse of increased
activity. The responses were averaged over 10 repetitions. We chose a Gaussian
pulse with an maximum instantaneous rate of 2900 spikes/s and a standard deviation of 2.8\ ms.
Note that this high driving rate is only the instantaneous maximum, and the
actual firing rate is limited by the refractory period following a spike. These
numbers are motivated by the early auditory system of barn owls
[@koppl97a;@Sullivan1984Segregation;@Konishi1985Owls], where instantaneous
spike rates of 3000 spikes/s occur in response to click stimuli
[@Carr2016Role]. However, our approach is not limited to the auditory system
(which would also require the introduction of the synchronization of the spike times to
the auditory stimulation frequency, called phase locking). Instead, this pulse of
activity could relate to various kinds of evoked activity in the nervous
system, such as sensory stimulation, motor activity or a spontaneous transient
increase in population spiking activity. 

To characterize the spatiotemporal dynamics of the evoked EFP, the time course
of the potential was calculated for several locations along the axon trunk. We
divided our analysis into two frequency bands by filtering the responses. The
first frequency band was the local field potential (LFP) obtained by low-pass
filtering with a cutoff frequency of 1\ kHz ([@fig:bigtree]A--C). The second frequency band was the
multiunit activity (MUA) obtained by high-pass filtering with a cutoff
frequency of 2.5\ kHz ([@fig:bigtree]D--F). To make the MUA easier to interpret in terms of overall
activity reflected, it was half-wave rectified and low-pass filtered (<500\ Hz, see
Materials and Methods). The two frequency bands showed a qualitatively different spatiotemporal
response in the vicinity of the projection zone, as we will show in the following.

We first studied the effect of the Gaussian rate pulse on the LFP
([@fig:bigtree]B). The filtering used to obtain the LFP removed most of the
identifiable components of individual spikes, while a population-level LFP signal
remained. The distribution of the maximum amplitudes of these responses is shown
by the  colored contour lines in [@fig:bigtree]A and the colored voltage traces
in [@fig:bigtree]B. Surrounding the terminal zone of the axon bundle in
[@fig:bigtree]A, LFP amplitudes showed a double-lobed shape typical of
a dipole.

In [@fig:bigtree]B, the LFP responses mostly showed monophasic deflections 
 elicited by the population firing rate pulse, in a manner similar to that
observed in [@fig:simpletree]E. Such deflections were visible at all recording
locations. In the radial direction away from the axon tree, i.e. in the horizontal
direction in the figure, the LFP amplitude decays. In the axial direction along
the axon tree, i.e.\ in vertical direction in the figure, the voltage deflection
reverses polarity in the middle of the terminal zone of the bundle
([@fig:bigtree]B). The polarity reversal occurs by a decrease of the amplitude
to zero and a subsequent reappearance with reversed polarity (as opposed to
a polarity reversal through a gradual shift in phase). This behaviour is also
typical for a dipolar field potential.

The point of the polarity reversal coincides with the middle of the terminal
zone. Interestingly, this means that the absolute value of the response
amplitude reaches a local minimum just when the number of axonal fibers reaches
a maximum. To better understand how the anatomical features of the axon bundle
and the LFP response amplitude are related, we compared its signed maximum
value (meaning the *signed* value corresponding to the maximum *magnitude* of the
amplitude of the LFP, black line in [@fig:bigtree]C) with the difference between
the number of branchings and terminations per 200\ µm bin (purple histogram in
[@fig:bigtree]C): Along the nerve trunk the number of fibers is constant. As
the axon bundle reaches its terminal zone, the number of bifurcations increases
(purple bars point to the right in [@fig:bigtree]C). The increase of
bifurcations is followed by an increase in terminations. In the middle of the
terminal zone, the number of bifurcations and terminations are equal. At the
same depth, the amplitude of the LFP component crosses zero.  At the end of the
terminal zone, the terminations outweigh the bifurcations (purple bars point
leftwards in [@fig:bigtree]C). As the axon bundle ends, there are no longer any
bifurcations or terminations, and the number of fibers decays toward zero.
Overall, the signed maximum amplitude LFP (black trace) follows the
distribution of branchings and terminations (purple histogram). This
progression of amplitudes in the low-frequency components seen in
[@fig:bigtree]C is also visible in [@fig:bigtree]B, most clearly in the first
column. The polarity reversal in the center of [@fig:bigtree]B corresponds to
the crossing of zero amplitude in [@fig:bigtree]C.

<!-- Why are the units for the density of nodes in Figs 2C and 2F different:
node/um^2 vs.  node/um ? 
-->

![An activity pulse in an axonal projection generates a dipole-like local field
potential (LFP). (**A**) Modeled example axon from the simulated bundle in
black, along with iso-potential lines for the low-pass filtered (<1\ kHz) EFP
signature of the activity pulse. The contours (amplitudes in mV as indicated by
colorbar) show the typical double-lobe of a dipole. (**B**) The LFP waveforms,
recorded at the locations of the colored dots in *A*, show mostly unimodal
peaks. The peak amplitude reverses polarity as a function of recording location in the
vertical direction. The reversal occurs by inverting the amplitude with
approximately unchanged shape. (**C**) Progression of the maximum LFP amplitude
with depth (black line) at a distance of 100\ µm from the trunk (indicated by
arrow in A). The amplitude closely follows the local change in number of
fibers, i.e. the difference in number between bifurcations and terminations
(purple histogram). (**D**) Modeled axon from bundle as in A, and iso-potential
contours for the MUA component. (**E**) Response waveforms of the MUA
component.
<!-- It is trivial that a rectified signal does not reverse polarity-->
High-pass filtered
(>2.5\ kHz) component (the first processing stage for calculation of MUA, see
Materials and Methods) in black. (**F**) Maximum amplitude of the MUA component
(black line) follows the number of fibers (teal-colored histogram). Note the
different units of the histograms in (C) and (F), due to the fact that (C) is
the derivative in space of (F).
](../figs/fig_2.pdf){#fig:bigtree height=110%}

<!--To better understand the relationship between axonal anatomy and this spatial
structure of the EFP, we plotted the change in density of the bundle, meaning
the number of terminations subtracted from the number of bifurcations at a
given 

The low-frequency component shows a distinct relationship to the anatomy: it
appears to be governed by the local density of bifurcations and terminations.
Along the nerve trunk the fiber density is constant, and the low frequency
component is unchanged. As the axon bundle reaches its projection zone, the
number of bifurcations increases, and the low frequency component increases in
amplitude. In the middle of the projection zone, the number of bifurcations and
terminations cancels out.  Correspondingly, the low-frequency component
amplitude reaches a local minimum.  As the end of the projection zone
approaches, the terminations outweigh the bifurcations, and the amplitude
increases, but the polarity is reversed (red box in [@fig:bigtree]B). As the
axon bundle ends, there are no longer any bifurcations or terminations, and the
amplitude decays.

The same distribution of maximum amplitudes for the high-frequency component,
shown in [@fig:bigtree]D, did not show the same lobed shape. Instead it decayed
much faster with distance in both axial and radial direction. This was also
reflected in the waveforms (Fig 1E). There is an increase in amplitude due to
the firing rate pulse at locations close to the nerve bundle, but at locations
further away from the trunk it is no longer distinguishable from the background
activity.-->

To understand how the EFP contributions are related to individual spikes, we next
turned our attention to the high-frequency MUA response. The MUA is thought to
reflect local spiking activity [@Stark2007Predicting]. In [@fig:bigtree]D, the
iso-amplitude lines of the MUA appeared like an ellipsoid centered at the
terminal zone ([@fig:bigtree]D); they did not show the double-lobe shape
observed for the LFP in [@fig:bigtree]A.

The shape of the MUA response was weakly dependent on the recording location.
The main change across locations was in the scaling of the amplitude
([@fig:bigtree]E). The amplitude decays with radial distance from the trunk. In
the axial direction, the amplitude reaches its maximum in the middle of the
fiber bundle. This dependence of the MUA amplitude on the axial location is further examined
in [@fig:bigtree]F. The amplitude of the MUA component (black trace) changes in
accordance with the local number of fibers (teal-colored histogram). The local number of
fibers and the MUA amplitude are both constant along the nerve trunk. Both
measures then increase in amplitude as the number of fibers is increased by
bifurcations. As the fibers terminate and the number of fibers decreases, so
does the amplitude of the MUA.

To conclude, we have shown a qualitatively different behaviour in the low- and
high-frequency components of the EFP, i.e. for the LFP and the MUA. The particular branching
and terminating structure of the axon bundle may thus give rise to a dipolar LFP.

Effects of bifurcations and terminations on distance scaling of EFPs
--------

To further demonstrate that bifurcations and terminations of axons give rise to
a dipolar field, we investigated the effect of an axon terminal structure on
the spatial reach of the EFP ([@fig:distscaling]). Motivated by the
fundamentally different spatial distributions of the low-frequency LFP and the
high-frequency MUA in [@fig:bigtree], we again differentiated between these
frequency bands and simulated an axon bundle containing a terminal
zone with bifurcations and terminations. Moreover, as a control, we also
simulated an axon bundle without bifurcations in which a fixed number of fibers
simply terminates.

![The low-frequency (<1\ kHz) component of the axon bundle EFP exceeds the
high-frequency (>2.5\ kHz) component in reach.
The scaling of the low-frequency (**A**, blue lines) and
high-frequency (**B**, green lines) components for the bifurcating (solid
lines) and non-bifurcating (dashed lines) axons on a double-logarithmic scale.
All distances are calculated from the center of the terminal zone. For
comparison, scalings that follow $r^{-2}$ are shown (black lines). (**C**)
Normalized dipole moments of the bifurcating and non-bifurcating bundles as
a function of frequency. (**D**) Ratio of the dipole moments between
bifurcating and non-bifurcating cases (red line), compared to the maximum ratio 10 of the
number of fibers (dotted line), to indicate supralinear (>10) and sublinear (<10) contributions.
](../figs/fig_3.pdf){#fig:distscaling}

<!-- Can you move the Fig. 3 to this point in the manuscript?!
Please add axis label "Frequency [kHz]" in C 
-->

In order to separate the effects of any radial fanning out of the axon bundle
from the effects of bifurcations and terminations, and to afford better
analytic tractability, we transitioned back to a simpler one-dimensional model of
the axon bundle (see Materials and Methods). This model omitted the radial
fanning out of the bundle in the terminal zone, as in [@fig:simpletree].
Furthermore, we discarded the detailed conductance-based simulation of the
membrane potential, and instead assumed a fixed membrane potential waveform
traveling along the axon trunk with a constant propagation velocity. Using linear
cable theory, it was then possible to calculate the membrane currents necessary
for the determination of the EFP. The analytic nature of the simplified model also allowed us to
consider a continuous number of fibers instead of simulating discrete
bifurcations and terminations. All following simulations are based on this
simplified model.

We simulated two axon bundle morphologies. The control case was
a non-bifurcating bundle, which had a constant number of 50 fibers up to the
termination point, and then tapered out with a Gaussian profile that was centered at the termination
point with a height of 50 fibers and width of 300\ µm.
The second case was that of an axon bundle with a projection zone
containing bifurcations. Here we added to the distribution of the number of axons
used for the
non-bifurcating control case a further Gaussian distribution
to account for the projection zone. This additional Gaussian
was also centered at the termination point, but had a width of 500\ µm and
an amplitude of 450 fibers. Unlike the tapering-out in the control condition,
this component was added for both before and after the termination point. It
resulted in a maximal fiber number of 500 at the termination point, which is a factor 10
larger than in the control case. Both distributions constructed in this way
were smooth, and they had smooth first derivatives in space. We considered
a conduction velocity of 1 m/s in this example, though results are
qualitatively the same for other values. In order to understand the
frequency-specific effects of the projection zone, we calculated
the responses to membrane potential components with temporal frequencies 
between 100 Hz and 5\ kHz, with the same amplitude for each frequency component. Due to the linear nature
of our model, the frequency responses obtained in this manner are applicable to
the Fourier components of any membrane potential
time-course. We then calculated the average amplitude of the resulting EFP
response by taking the standard deviation.
<!-- What was the spectrum of the membrane potential time course in Figs3 A and B?
I think that it is important to know this spectrum because we show amplitudes
in frequency ranges < 1kHz and > 2.5 kHz, and the amplitude depends on the shape of the spectrum. -->

The dipole-like component observed in [@fig:bigtree] for the low-frequency
component had its dipole axis aligned with the axon trunk. We therefore
considered the distance $r$ beyond the termination point in the direction
extending the axon trunk, which we call the axial direction. Because we
suspected a dipolar response, we expected the amplitude of the field potential
to decay as $r^{-2}$. To test the scaling behaviour of this component, we first
plotted the average amplitude of the low-frequency responses ($f$<1\ kHz) in
axial direction in [@fig:distscaling]A. The plot is on a double logarithmic
scale, meaning that the slope of the curve corresponds to the scaling exponent,
and the vertical offset corresponds to the amplitude of the size of the dipole
moment, which is a measure for the strength of the dipolar EFP. We observed the
expected $r^{-2}$ scaling for distances larger than the extent of the
bifurcation zone ($\gtrsim 1$\ mm).

Comparing the responses of the bifurcating axon bundle and the non-bifurcating control condition (full and dashed lines in
[@fig:distscaling]A), we saw that for short distances (< 1\ mm) the
response of the bifurcating case was a factor 10 larger than the control.
At these distances the response was due to the
local fibers, of which there are 10 times more in the bifurcating case.
At distances larger than 1\ mm, we observed that the distance
scaling was proportional to $r^{-2}$, meaning that there was a dipole moment in
both conditions (a vanishing dipole moment would have implied
a slope steeper than $r^{-2}$). Interestingly, for distances larger than 1\ mm
the response in the bifurcating case exceeded the control by a factor 20. We thus concluded that at
low frequencies, the bifurcation zone contributes supralinearly to the dipole
moment.

Next, we examined the high-frequency (>2.5\ kHz)  component
([@fig:distscaling]B). As in the low-frequency case, the response at distances
< 1\ mm was greater in the bifurcating case by a factor of 10. The asymptotic
scaling was also $r^{-2}$ for axial distances $> 1$\ mm in both cases. However,
unlike in the low-frequency case, the amplitudes were similar between
bifurcating and non-bifurcating cases. This meant that the presence of a bifurcation zone
did not contribute to the high-frequency dipole moments in the EFP.

<!--In contrast to the axial direction, the dipole hypothesis predicts a different
scaling behaviour of the EFP for the radial direction. The dipole component
becomes zero in the direction perpendicular to the dipole axis, and we thus
expected quadrupolar or higher-order scaling behaviour in this case. In
[@fig:distscaling]C we can see that this is indeed the case for the
low-frequency component. The potentials scale as $r^{-3}$, and the difference in
logarithmic amplitude between bifurcating and non-bifurcating case is roughly
the same at all distances. The high-frequency component also decayed as
$r^{-3}$ in the radial direction ([@fig:distscaling]D), but the difference in
logarithmic amplitudes was slightly diminished at larger distances. -->

Frequency-dependence of dipolar axonal EFPs
----

We showed that the dipole moment depends on both the
anatomy, i.e. the presence of a projection zone, and the temporal frequency range
of the underlying activity. This relationship can be qualitatively understood
by considering that in an axon bundle a voltage waveform propagates at some conduction velocity.  
The temporal frequency of this signal thus corresponds to a spatial frequency.
If the spatial frequency of the membrane potential matches the width of the projection
zone, the dipole moment can reach its maximum. In this case, at some point in time, 
positive membrane currents flow in one half of the projection
zone and negative membrane currents flow in the other half.
For example, if the
voltage waveform has a temporal frequency of 1\ kHz and propagates at 1\ m/s, the
spatial wavelength is 1\ mm. If the spatial width of the
termination zone is about 1\ mm, the dipole moment is maximal
(for a detailed derivation see Materials and Methods).
<!-- This notion is formalized in the last section of the Results. -->
<!--In the
situation described here, this should be the case for $f\approx 2\ln (2) 500 $ µm $\approx$\ 693 Hz. -->

To quantitatively understand the frequency-specific contributions to the dipole
moments, we examined the scaling behaviour of the EFP as a function of frequency. The
amplitude of the dipole moment was determined by fitting a straight line with
slope $-2$ to the double logarithmic scaling of the standard deviation of the
response at a given frequency. The fit was performed for distances $> 1$\ mm.
The extrapolation of this straight line to the axial distance 1\ µm was then
proportional to the dipole moments.

The normalized frequency-specific dipole moments are shown in
[@fig:distscaling]C. The dipole moment of the bifurcating case (solid line) has
a maximum at around 750\ Hz, as expected due to the agreement of the spatial
wavelength (1\ m/s / 750\ Hz = 1.33\ mm) and axial width (about 1\ mm) of the
projection zone. The match is not exact because the shapes of sine wave and
Gaussian are different. For lower and higher frequencies, there is a mismatch
in spatial wavelength and the width of the projection zone, meaning that the
projection zone contributes only little to the dipole moment, as observed in
[@fig:distscaling]B for higher frequencies. In the non-bifurcating control case
(dashed line) there is no projection zone, and the dipole moment decays
monotonically because lower frequencies correspond to a larger spatial
separation of positive and negative currents, and thus to a higher dipole
moment. 

<!--As in any multipole expansion, the dipolar component will dominate the EFP at
long distances in all directions except for those perpendicular to the dipole
axis. At shorter distances, as well as in the plane perpendicular to the dipole
axis, the quadrupolar component becomes important. For this reason we also
examined the frequency specific quadrupole moments. This meant fitting a line
in radial direction with slope -3 to the power spectral density.

The resulting quadrupole moments are shown in [@fig:distscaling]F. From the
qualitative argument made above, we expect the existence of an optimal
frequency for the contribution of the projection zone. Indeed we find that the
quadrupole moment of the bifurcating case (solid line) has a maximum at around
2\ kHz, and the quadrupole moment of the non-bifurcating case (dashed line) is
monotonically decreasing (as was the case for the dipole moment). As expected,
the maximum lies at a higher frequency than that for the dipole moment. -->

In the bifurcating case,
the maximum number of fibers was increased by
a factor of 10.  Accordingly, an increase in the dipole moment by a
factor of 10 from the non-bifurcating to the bifurcating case could be
explained by just linearly summing the dipole moments of individual fibers. 
An increase in the dipole moment by a factor greater than 10 would be supralinear.
In [@fig:distscaling]D we compared this relative impact of the terminal zone on
dipole moments (red line) by plotting the dipole moment ratios across
frequencies. The contribution of the terminal zone is greater than 10 (dotted
line) for intermediate frequencies between about 200 and 1300 Hz, and smaller
than a factor 10 outside this frequency range. 

Together, these observations show us that the terminal zone makes a frequency specific 
contribution to the far-reaching dipole field potential of the axon bundle.
This provides a deeper understanding of the findings of
[@fig:bigtree]: At low frequencies ($<1$\ kHz), we observed a supralinear dipolar behaviour due to the
strong contribution of the bundle at these frequencies, with the projection
zone forming the dipole axis. At higher frequencies, the bifurcation zone strongly
reduces the dipole moment, meaning that we could observe responses mainly locally.



The barn owl neurophonic potential in nucleus laminaris as an example for a dipolar field in an axonal terminal zone.
----

To test our models prediction of dipolar extracellular field potential responses
due to axon bundles, we recorded EFP responses from the barn owl auditory brain
stem. The barn owl has a highly developed auditory system with a strong
frequency-following response in the EFP (up to 9\ kHz, @Koppl1997b), called the
neurophonic, which can be recorded in the nucleus laminaris (NL). In NL, the
input from the two ears is first integrated to calculate the azimuthal location
of a sound source, and this information is encoded in the EFP [@carr90]. The
EFP in this region is mainly due to the afferent activity, and the contribution
of postsynaptic NL spikes is small [@Kuokkanen2010Origin;@Kuokkanen2013Linear].
Furthermore, the anatomy of the afferent axons is well known and follows a
stereotypical pattern [@carr88;@carr90]: Two fiber bundles enter the nucleus,
with fibers from the contralateral ear entering ventrally, and from the
ipsilateral ear entering dorsally. The axon bundles reach the NL from their origin without bifurcating, then bifurcate multiple times at the
border of the NL, and then terminate within NL. Axon bundles have a strong
directional preference and run roughly in parallel. Most of the volume within NL consists of incoming axons.
This well studied 
physiology and anatomy makes the system an ideal candidate to investigate the
EFPs of axon bundles; see the Discussion for arguments
why synaptic contributions to the EFP could also be neglected here. 

To explore the spatiotemporal structure of the EFP in NL, we performed
simultaneous multi-electrode recordings of the response in NL
([@fig:expmethod]A) to contralateral monaural click stimuli. The click responses
showed distinct low-frequency ([@fig:expmethod]B) and
high-frequency  ([@fig:expmethod]C) components, as previously reported
[@wagner09]. The frequency of the high-frequency ringing
corresponds to the recording location on the frequency map within NL, and
the ringing reflects the frequency tuning and phase locking of the incoming axons.
In addition, there is a low-frequency component in the response
([@fig:expmethod]B). We filtered the data to roughly separate these components.
The cutoff to split the components was set to 2\ kHz because this frequency was
always well below the high-frequency ringing component.

The same simplified model used in [@fig:distscaling]
was fit to the data (example in [@fig:expmethod]) by
performing a nonlinear least squares optimization. Free parameters were (1) the
number of fibers at the depth of each recording location, (2) the average
spatial derivative of the membrane potential over time in the fibers at the
location next to the most dorsal electrode, (3) the axonal conduction velocity,
and (4) the distance between the axon bundle and electrode array.


![Multielectrode recordings in the barn owl show dipolar axonal EFPs. (**A**)
Photomicrograph of a 40\ µm thick transverse Nissl stained section through the
dorsal brain stem, containing a superimposed, to scale, diagram of the
multielectrode probe. The probe produced a small slit in a cerebellar folium
overlying the IVth ventricle (\*), and penetrated into the nucleus laminaris
(NL). The recordings were made in NL, and electrodes extended to both sides of
the nucleus. The outline of the probe is shown in light green, with the
recording electrodes indicated by magenta dots, and the reference electrode
as a magenta rectangle. The low-frequency (<2\ kHz) component (**B**) and
the high-frequency (>2\ kHz) component (**C**) are ordered in the same way as the
electrodes, with three examples connected to their recording sites by black
lines. The time scales in B and C are identical (indicated by scale bar). Traces were averaged over 10 repetitions. Voltage
scales are indicated by individual scalebars.
](../figs/fig_4.pdf){#fig:expmethod}


![The spatial structure of EFPs recorded from the nucleus laminaris of the barn
owl can be explained by a model of axonal field potentials (for details, see
Materials and Methods). (**A**) Membrane voltage averaged across fibers in the
model when fit to the data. (**B**) Fitted number of fibers in the model as
a function of penetration depth. (**C**) Low-frequency ($\leq 2$\ kHz)
components of the EFP in response to a click stimulus at time 0\ ms, at
different recording depths. The depth is measured in the direction from dorsal
to ventral. Recorded responses (orange) are shown along with model fits
(black). (**D**) High-frequency ($\geq 2$\ kHz) responses in recordings (orange)
and model (black). Recorded traces were averaged over 10 repetitions.
](../figs/fig_5.pdf){#fig:barnowl height=115%}

The resulting EFP responses and the model fit are depicted in [@fig:barnowl].
[@fig:barnowl]A shows the inferred average over trials of the deviation of the
membrane potential from the resting potential in response to the stimulus, at a
location in the axon next to the first electrode (penetration depth 1550\ µm),
obtained from the fit. The inferred voltage is composed of high- and low-frequency
components similar to those observed in the EFP. The inferred number of fibers
as a function of dorsoventral depth is shown in [@fig:barnowl]B. The number
(scaled by an arbitrary factor) has its maximum at the center of the electrode
array, and decays steadily to both sides. This profile of the number of fibers
is consistent with the known anatomy of axons in NL
[@carr90;@Kuokkanen2010Origin].

The low-frequency ($30$\ Hz - $2$\ kHz, [@fig:barnowl]C) responses reveal the
typical polarity reversal that we predicted for an axonal terminal zone
([@fig:simpletree;@fig:bigtree]). The dorsoventral depth is now
on the vertical axis, meaning that the vertical axis of [@fig:barnowl]C and
D corresponds to the horizontal axis in [@fig:barnowl]B. The
orange lines indicate the actual responses in the data.

The responses at the dorsal and ventral edges show the same shape, but with
opposite polarity, as expected for a dipolar field. Note that for a pure dipole
field, the amplitude of the central responses have zero amplitude. In the data
shown here, central responses show a diminished maximum amplitude, which we
interpret as the contribution of higher-order (mostly quadrupole) components.
The model is able to capture the behaviour of this quadrupolar component as
well, with a slight underestimation of the amplitude of the peak at ventral
locations. The model even captures a small oscillation in the data with
period\ of\ $\approx 1$\ ms in the center of the recording. Here, too, the small
deviations are likely due to slightly inhomogeneous conduction velocities or
non-axonal sources.

In addition to the dipolar behavior of the low-frequency response, we also
examined the  high-frequency ($\geq 2$\ kHz) response, shown in
[@fig:barnowl]C. The responses have a Gabor-like shape, as expected
[@wagner09], with maximum amplitude in the center of the recording array, at
around 850\ µm penetration depth. The axonal conduction velocity was calculated
to be 4.0 m/s, and the distance from the bundle was 162\ µm. A previously
published estimate of the axonal conduction velocity in this nucleus
[@McColgan2014Functional] gave a confidence bound of 0.4-6 m/s. Toward the
edges (< 100\ µm and > 1400\ µm), the amplitude decays. In the central region
(400-1200\ µm recording depth), a systematic shift in delay can be observed,
while the response appears stationary in the more dorsal and ventral
electrodes. The delay increases from ventral to dorsal, which is consistent
with the anatomy for contralateral stimulation.

All these aspects of the data are qualitatively reproduced by the model
([@fig:barnowl]D, black traces). The main deviation between model and data lies
in a diminished amplitude of the oscillation modelled at the most central
electrode sites. Because the phase shift in the central region is mainly
determined by the conduction velocity, this mismatch might be due to a variable
conduction velocity in the nucleus, and the constant velocity in the model.
@McColgan2014Functional showed that different conduction velocities exist in
the core and periphery of the nucleus, as predicted from variable internode
distances by @carr90. A diminished amplitude in the fit could reflect an
inability of the model to exactly match the phase progression. Another possible
explanation is that the additional amplitude could be due to non-axonal sources
such as synaptic currents or postsynaptic spikes, which do not follow the
assumptions underlying our model; see the Discussion for arguments why we
expect such contributions to the EFP to be small. 

When comparing the inferred membrane potential response ([@fig:barnowl]A) to
the measured EFP response ([@fig:barnowl]C and D), the most salient difference
is the dissimilar sizes of the frequency components. In the EFP, the
low-frequency component has a comparable amplitude to the high-frequency
component, but in the membrane potential the low-frequency component is much
larger because the EFP is related to membrane currents, which are proportional
to the first and second derivatives of the membrane potential, and taking the
derivative is equivalent to applying a high-pass filter.

We performed the fitting procedure (example in [@fig:barnowl]) for 26
recordings from 3 different owls, with monaural stimulation from both ears
(implying the activation of distinct axonal populations). The average
correlation coefficient for all recordings was $R^2=0.56\pm 0.15$. The
correlation coefficient for the example shown in [@fig:barnowl] was 0.62.

Dipole moments of idealized axon bundles
----

We have shown theoretically and experimentally for
specific examples of axonal projection zones and inputs 
how dipolar EFPs emerge. We now generalize this approach and predict the
resulting dipolar EFP for arbitrary axon and stimulus configurations. Based on
our cable-theory model, we analytically derived the maximal dipole
moment $p_\text{max}$ for a large range of scenarios.
From a given dipole moment the maximum far field potential at 
distance $r$ can be calculated
as $\phi_\text{max}=\frac{p_\text{max}}{4\pi \sigma_e r^2}$  where
$\sigma_e$ is the extracellular conductivity.

To simplify the analytical derivation as
much as possible, we assumed a Gaussian waveform for the membrane potential of
a single spike, with an amplitude $\bar{V}_{\text{spike}}$ and a width
$\sigma_{\text{spike}}$. The resting membrane potential was irrelevant because
only the first and second derivatives of the membrane potential contribute. The
axon bundle population consisted of fibers with diameter $a$, axial resistance
$r_L$, and conduction velocity $v$. The population was assumed to be driven with
a Gaussian firing-rate pulse with maximum firing rate
$\bar{\lambda}_{\text{pulse}}$ and width $\sigma_{\text{pulse}}$. The
distribution of the number of fibers at a given depth location was also
described with a Gaussian, with width $\sigma_n$ and maximum number $\bar{n}$.
This is an adequate approximation if the spikes in the incoming fibers
contribute little to the dipole moment before reaching the projection zone. In
this scenario, we calculated the maximum dipole moment of the bundle (see
Materials and Methods for details) to be

\begin{align}
p_\text{max} = \frac{2  \pi^2  a^2 \bar{n} \bar{\lambda}_{\text{pulse}} \bar{V}_{\text{spike}}}{\sqrt{e} r_L } \cdot
\frac{v \sigma_n \sigma_{\text{pulse}} \sigma_{\text{spike}}}
{\left(\sigma_n^2+v^2 \left(\sigma_{\text{pulse}}^2+\sigma_{\text{spike}}^2\right)\right)} \label{eqn:pmax}
\quad .
\end{align}

<!-- Please use an equation number because you refer to it below (at least two times)
as "this formula" whereas "Equation XX" would be much better -->

Equation \ref{eqn:pmax} tells us that the dipole moment is proportional to $a^2$,
$\bar{n}$, $\bar{\lambda}_{\text{pulse}}$, $\bar{V}_{\text{spike}}$, and $1/r_L$. The
dependence on $v$ and the widths is more complicated; the response is
maximal with respect to the three (spatial) widths $\sigma_n$,
$v\sigma_{\text{pulse}}$ and $v\sigma_{\text{spike}}$ when they are of the form
$w_1^2=w_2^2+w_3^2$, where $w_1$ is the largest of the three terms, while $w_2$
and $w_3$ are the other two terms, regardless of order. The dipole moment is
thus maximal when the widths of the spike, the pulse, and the terminal zone agree. In particular, if $\sigma_n$
(the width of the terminal zone) is the widest, then the dipole moment is
maximal if $\sigma_n$ is equal to the spatial width of the overall activity in
the axons, which is $v\sqrt{\sigma_{\text{spike}}^2+\sigma_{\text{pulse}}^2}$.
The widths add in this way because the overall activity is the convolution of
two Gaussians.

Using this formula, it is then possible to calculate the expected contributions
to the EFP for different scenarios. To test the approximation in the case of
the barn owl, we chose the following values: axon diameter $a$\ =\ 2\ µm,
conduction velocity $v$\ =\ 4\ $\frac{\text{m}}{\text{s}}$ as inferred in the
previous section, axial resistivity $r_L$\ =\ 1 $\Omega\text{m}$, and
extracellular conductivity  $\sigma_e$\ =\ 0.33 $\frac{\text{S}}{\text{m}}$ as
used in studies of the cortex [@Gold2006Origin;@Holt1999Electrical], anatomical and physiological
parameters $\sigma_n$\ =\ 500 µm, $\bar{n}$\ =\ 4000,
$\bar{V}_{\text{spike}}$\ = 70 mV from [@carr90], and activation patterns for
click stimulation from [@koppl97a;@Carr2016Role]: $\bar{\lambda}_\text{pulse}$\ =\ 3000 
spikes/s, $\sigma_\text{spike}$\ = 250\ µs, $\sigma_\text{pulse}$\ =\ 0.5 ms.
This leads to a value for the dipole moment of $p_\text{max} \approx 1.9\,
\text{µA}\cdot\text{mm}$. At a distance of 750\ µm, roughly the furthest
distance recorded with the multielectrode array in [@fig:expmethod] and
[@fig:barnowl], this dipole moment corresponded to a field potential of 0.82
mV, consistent with our experimental findings.

Dipole sources are also to be expected to make up the majority of the
electrical signals recorded at the scalp [@Nunez2006Electric]. One such signal
is the auditory brainstem response (ABR), which is recorded at the scalp in
response to auditory stimulation with clicks or chirps [@Riedel2002Comparison].
The amplitude of about 10\ µV of the ABR in the barn owl has recently been reported by
@PalancaCastan2016Binaural. We calculated the contribution expected from an
axon bundle with the same characteristics as described before at 2\ cm from NL,
aiming to estimate the contribution to the ABR. Multiplying by a factor of 2 to
account for the fact that there is an NL in each hemisphere, the predicted
contribution was 2.3\ µV, which is of the same order of magnitude as the
value reported in the experiments.


As a second example, we considered thalamocortical projections, for which
@Swadlow2000Influence reported amplitudes of extracellular spike-related
potentials, called axon terminal potentials (AxTP), at various locations; for example, at 400
µm from the center of the dipole, they reported an amplitude of the response of $\approx$\ 1\ µV.
Individual thalamocortical axons are thin and have large and highly
branched projection zones [@Feldmeyer2012Excitatory], so we estimated
$\sigma_n$\ =\ 250\ µm, $\bar{n}$\ =\ 30, and $a$\ =\ 1\ µm. We assumed
a jitter
$\sigma_\text{pulse}$\ =\ 125\ µs in the arrival time instead of a true activity pulse, and we normalized the pulse to have area 1
because we were considering a spike triggered average. The conduction velocity
has been reported as $v$\ =\ 8.5\ m/s [@Simons2007Thalamocortical]. Leaving all
other values as in the previous approximation, we arrived at a dipole moment of
$p_\text{max} \approx 1.5 \text{µA}\cdot\text{µm}$, yielding an extracellular
spike amplitude of $\approx$\ 2.3\ µV at the distance of 400\ µm, which is of
the same order of magnitude as the value ($\approx$\ 1\ µV) reported by
@Swadlow2000Influence.

To summarize, Equation \ref{eqn:pmax} quantitatively predicts the contribution of
axonal projection zones to the far field EFP, and this prediction
matched experimental values in several cases.


Discussion
==============
Numerical simulations, analytical calculations, and experimental data allow us to 
 show how axonal fiber bundles may contribute to the EFP, and 
explain how the contributions are shaped by axonal morphology. There are
three principal effects of axon bundle structure on the EFP. First, the
low-frequency components of the EFP are governed by the densities of
bifurcations and terminations and can have a dipolar structure
([@fig:simpletree] and [@fig:bigtree]A-C). Second, the high-frequency components
are governed by the local number of fibers ([@fig:bigtree]D-F). Third, the low-frequency components exceed the high-frequency components in
spatial reach. In particular, the dipolar low-frequency components are not
negligible and exceed the reach of the presumed quadrupolar nature of axonal
EFPs ([@fig:distscaling]).

Relevance to the interpretation of electrophysiological recordings
----

Our findings relate to the interpretation of a wide range of
electrophysiological data in general, and to the estimation of current sources in particular. When performing a typical current source density (CSD)
analysis, the local number of fibers cannot be disentangled from membrane
current density [@Nicholson1973Theoretical;@Potworowski2011Kernel]. In CSD analysis, the membrane current densities can
independently vary with time and location. In the case of an axonal fiber
bundle as discussed here, the situation is different: the number of fibers is
variable in space, in particular in the terminal zone, but the current sources at different locations are highly correlated, because they are
caused by propagating action potentials. In the case presented here
([@fig:barnowl]), where axonal action potentials dominate the EFP, it was 
possible to recover from the recording the (normalized) fiber densities and average membrane potentials.

Beyond recovering actual fiber densities and membrane potentials, our approach
enables the interpretation of CSD results in the presence of axon fiber
bundles. For example, the sink and source distribution found in classical CSD
analysis of axon bundles
[@Mitzdorf1978Prominent;@Mitzdorf1985Current;@Mitzdorf1977Laminar] shows
a dipolar structure in terminal zones, but a conclusive explanation of their
origin was not given. @Tenke1993Interpretation studied the dipole at an axonal
terminal zone in the macaque striate cortex for a fixed point in time, attributing the sinks to the
depolarized axon endings, and the sources to the return currents distributed
along the axons, while not taking account of additional currents flowing at
bifurcations. Our modeling approach provides a novel way of interpreting these
findings in terms of actively propagated action potentials in a fiber bundle.

As an example case for a fiber bundle, we recorded from the barn owl nucleus laminaris. [@fig:expmethod] and
[@fig:barnowl] showed that the low- and high-frequency components show
qualitatively different behaviours as a function of recording location relative
to the terminal zone. The low-frequency component is a largely stationary
phenomenon, while the fine structure of the high-frequency component shifts
gradually in space as a function of the axonal conduction velocity
([@fig:barnowl]). Low-frequency components have a strong dipole moment, meaning
that it contributes to the far-field EFP. Due to the difference in reach, the
high-frequency component is most suitable for the study of local phenomena
while the low-frequency component bears information about locations more
distant from the recording site ([@fig:distscaling]), consistent with findings
on non-axonal EFPs [@Pettersen2008Amplitude;@Leski2013Frequency].

Dipolar fields are essential for the generation of electrical
field potentials at greater distances from the brain. The most prominent of
these is the EEG, which is commonly attributed to the dipolar contributions of
pyramidal cells [@Nunez2006Electric]. As originally suggested by
@Tenke1993Interpretation, we propose that axonal contributions might also be
relevant in the analysis of these fields. This is particularly true for the
auditory brainstem response (ABR), which is closely related to the EEG and
involves brain structures that display high degrees of synchrony as well as
axonal organization, and are thus ideal candidates for the generation of axonal
field potentials visible at long ranges. This would in turn have implications
for the interpretation of the ABR in clinical contexts.

The ABR amplitude of the barn owl has been reported to be on the order of 10 µV
[@PalancaCastan2016Binaural] while we estimated a contribution of about
2 µV amplitude from the incoming axons in NL alone. This estimate of 20% axonal
contribution to the ABR suggests that there may indeed be measurable components
due to axons in the ABR, in particular, and the EEG, in general.
However, this estimate is crude because it did not
take into account the anatomy of the skull except for its size. Future studies
based on a more detailed skull model and paired recordings of ABR and EFP 
should improve our understanding of axonal contributions to the
ABR.

We have shown that the EFP in the barn owl NL is consistent with a model of
axonal sources. We believe synaptic contributions to be small in this case for
the following reasons: Deflection of the somatic membrane potential due to
synaptic currents is much smaller than the impact of postsynaptic spikes
[@Ashida2007Passive;@Funabiki2011Computation]. Since postsynaptic spikes
contribute little to the EFP [@Kuokkanen2010Origin], we suspect that the
synaptic contributions to the EFP are also small. Furthermore, synaptic EFP
contributions would require a spatial separation of currents, which is not
possible to achieve in NL because of the symmetrical arrangement of synapses on
the spherical NL cell bodies [@carr90], meaning that synaptic sources can also
not explain a dipolar EFP, and are thus expected to contribute little to the
EFP.

Dipolar EFPs in other animals and brain regions
----

It is interesting to note that a similar dipole-like reversal of polarity as
shown here for the barn owl NL has been reported in the chicken NL
[@Schwarz1992Can], as well as in the mammalian analog to NL, the medial
superior olive (MSO) [@McLaughlin2010Oscillatory]. The phase reversal in this
case was modeled based on the assumption that the postsynaptic NL and MSO
dendrites with their bipolar morphology generate the dipolar EFP response
[@McLaughlin2010Oscillatory; @Goldwyn2014Model]. However, in the owl this
dipolar morphology of neurons is largely absent [@carr90], making dendritic
sources unlikely. This suggests that similar dipolar field potentials in owls
and mammals emerge from different physiological substrates. Such a convergence
might point towards an evolutionary pressure favouring such an EFP structure in
coincidence detection systems, and indeed, @Goldwyn2016Neuronal have proposed a
model in which this extracellular potential enhances the function of
coincidence detectors through a form of ephaptic interaction. Their approach
centers on dendrites and is not directly transferable, but it seems possible
that a similar mechanism might arise in the barn owl NL based on axonal EFPs.

The key assumption underlying our modeling of axonal geometries is that there
exists a preferential direction of the axon arbor. In many structures
this is the case, for example in the parts of the auditory brainstem we studied
here. In other brain regions, this tendency is not as prominent, with
a spectrum existing between completely directed and undirected growth. More
undirected growth would lead to a more diffuse response in the EFP, and
eventually to a cancellation of the dipolar field potentials. @Cuntz2010One and
@Budd2010Neocortical studied the principles underlying the growth patterns of
axons and found that the degree of direction in the growth of an axon depends
on the balance struck between conduction delay and wiring cost. Optimizing for
minimal conduction time leads to highly directed structures, while optimizing
wiring cost leads to more tortuous, undirected growth. This suggests that
directed structures - and thus also strong, dipolar EFPs due to axons - may be
more prevalent in systems which require high temporal precision in the
information processing.

Conclusion
----

Axonal projections can contribute substantially to EFPs. Our results
quantitatively show how the anatomy of axon terminal zones and the
activity in axons determine its frequency-specific far-field
contribution to the EFP.



Materials and Methods
==============

Experimental recordings
-----------------------

The experiments were conducted at the Department of Biology of the University
Maryland. Data was collected from three barn owls (*Tyto furcata pratincola*).
Procedures conformed to NIH Guidelines for Animal Research and were approved by
the Animal Care and Use Committee of the University of Maryland. Anaesthesia
was induced prior to each experiment by intramuscular injection of a total of
$8-10$ ml/kg of $20\%$ urethane divided into three to four injections over the
course of $3$ hours. Body temperature was maintained at $39^\circ$C by a
feedback-controlled heating blanket.

Recordings were made in a sound-attenuating chamber (Acoustic Systems Inc.,
Austin, TX, USA). Tungsten electrodes with impedances between $2$ and $20$
M$\Omega$ were used to find suitable recording locations in NL. Once NL had
been located, the tungsten electrode was retracted and replaced with a 32 channel
multi-electrode array (A1x32-15mm-50-413-A32, Neuronexus, Ann Arbor, MI, USA).
The multi-electrode array was lowered using a microdrive (MP225, Sutter
Instruments Co., Novato, CA, USA) during continuous presentation of a
white-noise burst stimulus until visual inspection of the waveform showed that
NL was at the center of the array. A grounded silver chloride pellet, placed
under the animal's skin around the incision, served as the animal ground electrode.
Electrode signals were amplified by a headstage (HS36, Neuralynx Inc., Tucson,
AZ, USA). An adapter (ADPT-HS36-N2T-32A, Neuralynx Inc.) was used between the
electrode and the headstage. A further adapter (ADPT-HS-36-ERP-27, Neuralynx
Inc.) was used between the headstage and the control panel in order to map all 32
channels to the amplifiers. Pre-amplified electrode signals were passed to the
control panel (ERP27, Neuralynx Inc.), then to four 8-channel amplifiers
(Lynx-8, Neuralynx Inc.), and then to an analogue-to-digital converter (Cheetah
Digital Interface, Neuralynx Inc.) connected to a personal computer running
Cheetah5 software (Neuralynx Inc.) where the responses were stored for off-line
analysis.

Acoustic stimuli were digitally generated by a custom-made \textsc{Matlab}
(MathWorks, Natick, MA, USA) script driving a signal-processing board (RX6,
Tucker-Davis Techonologies, Alachua, FL, USA) at a sampling rate of 195.3125\ kHz. The sound stimuli
were attenuated using a programmable attenuator (PA5, Tucker-Davis
Techonologies). Click stimuli were generated as a single
half-wave of a 5\ kHz sine tone. Miniature earphones were inserted into the
owl's ear canals and fixed to a headplate. Acoustic stimuli were fed to these
earphones. Stimulus delivery was triggered by National Instruments equipment
(NI USB-6259 and BNC-2090A, National Instruments Inc, Austin, TX, USA), and
stimulus presentation times were recorded along with the responses. Trigger
pulses were configured in \textsc{MatLab} through Ephus software (Vidrio
Technologies LLC, Ashburn, VA, USA). Responses were averaged over 10 repetitions.

Multi-compartment model of axons
---------------------

We modeled axons using NEURON [@Hines1997NEURON; @Hines2009NEURON] and extended
previous work by @Kuba2009Roles, which included the high- and low-threshold
potassium channels used by @Rathouz1998Characterization. The axon was modeled
as a sequence of active nodes and passive myelinated segments. The nodes
and myelinated segments had lengths of 2\ µm and 75\ µm, respectively. We included branching axons in our simulations. Branches were generated by
connecting two passive segments to a node, and continuing the alternation of
active and passive segments in each resulting branch. In cases where
the positions of bifurcations or terminations of axons were fixed, the closest passive segment
was shortened in order to obtain the total length before the bifurcation
or termination.

To evoke an action potential at a designated time, a special conductance was temporarily activated
in the first node of Ranvier. The conductance had a reversal
potential of 0 mV, a maximal amplitude of 0.05\ µS, and a time course
described by an alpha-function with time constant 0.01\ ms. Soma and axon
initial segment were not modeled explicitly. 

For the simplified axon geometries used in [@fig:simpletree], the branching
pattern was fixed as described in the caption, with the exception of
the axial position of the branching points in [@fig:simpletree]E, where a random
offset between branching points was drawn from a gamma distribution with mean
400 µm and standard deviation 300 µm. The initial branching point for each axon was
offset from the original location by a distance drawn from a
Gaussian distribution with mean zero and a width of 300 µm.
This was done to smooth out the effects of individual branchings or
terminations.

For the axons in [@fig:bigtree], branching patterns
were generated procedurally, starting with a root segment. In order to avoid
artifacts from the stimulus and to simulate a long fiber tract prior to the terminal
zone, a sequence of 10 active and passive segments without bifurcations was
assumed before the terminal zone. To this root, segments were appended
iteratively. Before adding a segment, a decision whether to branch or terminate
an axon was drawn from a probability distribution that was dependent on the
axial position of the end of the previous segment. These probability
distributions were modeled as logistic functions with the parameters adjusted
to roughly match the numbers of branchings and terminations shown by @carr90.
Thus, an initial phase dominated by bifurcations was followed by a phase
dominated by terminations, with the probability of termination reaching 100\%
at the end of the terminal zone. The distribution of bifurcations had its
maximum at axial location $z=0$ with a standard deviation of 200 µm. The
distribution of terminations had its maximum at at $z=500$ µm, with a standard
deviation of 100 µm. The branching angle had an average of $20^\circ$, with
a standard deviation of $5^\circ$. At branching points, the plane containing
the branches had a uniform random orientation, resulting in a 3-dimensional
structure of the axon bundle.

Numerical simulations of action potentials propagating along axons
yielded the membrane currents from which we calculated extracellular
fields. This procedure is described in detail by @Gold2006Origin. Briefly, the
extracellular medium is assumed to be a homogeneous volume conductor with
conductivity $\sigma_e$, and a quasi-static approximation of the electrical
field potential $\phi$ is made. The extracellular potential
$\phi(\mathbf{r},t)$ at location $\mathbf{r}$ and time $t$ due to a membrane current density
distribution $i(\mathbf{r},t)$ is then governed by the equation $\Delta
\phi(\mathbf{r},t) = \frac{1}{\sigma_e} i(\mathbf{r},t)$, with $\Delta$
denoting the Laplace operator [@Nunez2006Electric]. If the currents $I$ are
constrained to a volume $W$, this equation has the solution
\begin{equation}
\phi(\mathbf{r},t)=\frac{1}{4\pi\sigma_{e}}\int_{W}\frac{i(\mathbf{r}',t)}{|\mathbf{r}-\mathbf{r}'|}\textrm{d}\mathbf{r}'
\label{eqn:basic}
\end{equation}
Since the majority of the current flows through the small nodes of Ranvier in
myelinated axons, we used the point-source approximation; we did not use the
line-source approximation [@Holt1999Electrical].

Analysis of the resulting extracellular potential included filtering. All
filtering was performed with third-order Butterworth filters. The multiunit
activity (MUA) was calculated by high-pass filtering the signal with a cutoff
of 2500\ Hz, setting all samples with negative values to zero, and then
low-pass filtering the resulting response with a cutoff of 500\ Hz. The LFP was
calculated by low-pass filtering the signal with a cutoff of 1000\ Hz.

Mean field model of an axon bundle
----------------------------

\label{sec:efpresp}

To better understand the processes leading to the complex spatio-temporal
patterns of extracellular fields, we devised an analytically tractable model of
axon bundles. We defined the spatial dimension in cylindrical coordinates
$\mathbf{r}=(\rho,\varphi,z)$, and we considered a simple model axon bundle
that extended infinitely in the axial $z$-direction at $\rho=0$. The bundle had
a variable number of fibers along the $z$ axis, denoted by $n(z)$, each of
which cylindrical with an identical radius $a$. This meant that the total cross-sectional area $A$ of the bundle at a given depth $z$ was given by $A(z)=\pi a^2 n(z)$. We assumed the axons to be perfect
transmission lines, meaning that the action potential is a traveling wave with
velocity $v$ along the axon. In particular, we neglected delays and
distortions that can be induced when an axon branches or terminates. In this
case, we could assume that the membrane voltage was the same in each fiber for a given $z$
coordinate. From linear cable theory [e.g. @Jack75Electric], we then obtained
the following expression for the total transmembrane current per unit length $I(z,t)$ from a
given membrane potential $V(z,t)$:

\begin{align}
I(z,t)& = \frac{\partial }{\partial z}\left(\frac{A(z)}{r_L}\frac{\partial }{\partial z}V(z,t)\right)\\
&= \frac{\pi a^2}{r_L}\frac{\partial }{\partial z}\left(n(z)\frac{\partial }{\partial z}V(z,t)\right) \\
&= \frac{\pi a^2}{r_L}\left(\frac{\partial n}{\partial z}(z)\cdot\frac{\partial V}{\partial z}(z,t)+n(z)\cdot\frac{\partial ^2V}{\partial z^2}(z,t)\right)
\label{eqn:current}
\end{align}
<!--
\ &= \frac{\partial n}{\partial z}(z)\cdot\frac{1}{v}\frac{\partial V}{\partial
t}(z,t)+n(z)\cdot\frac{1}{v^2}\frac{\partial ^2V}{\partial t^2}(z,t)

from which, together with the fact that the axial conductivity is proportional
to the number of fibers $g_{tot}=ng$ we can then derive the membrane currents
flowing at a given location:

\begin{align}
I(z,t)& = \frac{d}{dz}\left(n(z)\frac{d}{dz}V(z,t)\right)\ &= \frac{dn}{dz}(z)\cdot\frac{1}{v}\frac{dV}{dt}(z,t)-n(z)\cdot\frac{1}{v^2}\frac{d^2V}{dt^2}(z,t)
\end{align}
-->
We next calculated the corresponding extracellular field potential
$\phi(\mathbf{r},t)$ of a given membrane potential waveform $V(z,t)$
propagating through the axon bundle. Due to the rotational symmetry of the
system and the fact that current flows only at $\rho = 0$, and the membrane
current can be described as $i(\mathbf{r},t)=I(z,t)\frac{\delta(\rho)}{\rho}$,
where $\frac{\delta(\rho)}{\rho}$ is the Dirac delta distribution for a line at
$\rho=0$. Applying this membrane current to Equation \ref{eqn:basic}, we
obtained

\begin{align}\label{eqn:simple_field_pot}
    \phi(\mathbf{r},t) =\frac{1}{4\pi\sigma_{e}}\int_{-\infty}^{\infty}\frac{I(z',t)}{\sqrt{(z-z')^2 + \rho^2}}\textrm{d}z'
\end{align}

which is independent of the angle $\varphi$.

To derive the frequency responses in [@fig:distscaling], we simulated the
membrane potentials as sinusoids, i.e. $V(z,t) = \sin\left(2\pi
f\cdot\left(z-tv\right)\right)$, with varying frequencies $f$ between 100 Hz
and 5\ kHz and calculated the standard deviation of the response for each frequency individually. The amplitude was the same for all frequencies.

To derive the dipole moment of a simplified projection zone, we considered an
axon bundle in which identical spikes with the waveform $V_\text{spike}(z,t)$
propagate as traveling waves with a velocity $v$ in positive $z$ direction: $V_\text{spike}(z,t) =
V_\text{spike}(z-tv,0)$. If each of the fibers is stimulated with an
inhomogeneous Poisson process, with the driving rate $\lambda(t)$ shared among
all axons, the average membrane potential across fibers will be
$V(z,t) = V_\text{spike}(z,t)\ast \lambda(t)$, where $\ast$
denotes the convolution with respect to the time $t$. Plugging this into Equation \ref{eqn:current}, we obtained
\begin{align}
I(z,t)& = \frac{\pi a^2}{r_L}\left(\frac{\partial n}{\partial z}(z)\cdot\frac{\partial}{\partial z}\left[V_\text{spike}(z,t)\ast \lambda(t)\right]+n(z)\cdot\frac{\partial ^2}{\partial z^2}\left[V_\text{spike}(z,t)\ast \lambda(t)\right] \right) \\ 
& = \frac{\pi a^2}{r_L}\lambda(t)\ast\left(\frac{\partial n}{\partial z}(z)\cdot\frac{\partial}{\partial z}V_\text{spike}(z,t)+n(z)\cdot\frac{\partial ^2}{\partial z^2}V_\text{spike}(z,t) \right)
\end{align}

Assuming Gaussian shapes for the firing-rate pulse $\lambda(t) = \bar\lambda_{\text{pulse}}
\exp\left(-\frac{t^2}{2\sigma_\text{pulse}^2}\right)$, the spike $V_\text{spike}(z,t) = V_\text{spike}(z-tv) =
\bar{V}_\text{spike} \exp\left(-\frac{(z-tv)^2}{2\sigma_\text{spike}^2}\right)$, and the fiber
bundle projection zone $n(z) = \bar{n} \exp\left(-\frac{z^2}{2\sigma_\text{n}^2}\right)$, we
were able to take advantage of the fact that the product and the convolution of
two Gaussians are again Gaussian, and obtained 

\begin{align}\label{eqn:simple_dipole_cur} I(z,t)&=\bar{n} \bar{\lambda
}_{\text{pulse}} \bar{V}_{\text{spike}}  \sqrt{2} \pi ^{3/2} a^2  \cdot \exp
\left(-\frac{z^2}{2 \sigma _n^2}-\frac{(z-t v)^2}{2 v^2 \left(\sigma
_{\text{pulse}}^2+\sigma _{\text{spike}}^2\right)}\right) \\ \nonumber
&\cdot\frac{ \sigma _n^2 \left(-v^2 \sigma _{\text{pulse}}^2-v^2 \sigma
_{\text{spike}}^2+(z-t v)^2\right)-v^2 z \left(\sigma _{\text{pulse}}^2+\sigma
_{\text{spike}}^2\right) (t v-z)}{v^4 r_L \sigma _n^2 \sqrt{\frac{1}{\sigma
_{\text{pulse}}^2}+\frac{1}{\sigma _{\text{spike}}^2}} \left(\sigma
_{\text{pulse}}^2+\sigma _{\text{spike}}^2\right){}^2} \quad .
\end{align}


The dipole moment $p(t)$ is defined as 
\begin{equation}
p(t) = \int_{-\infty}^{\infty}z\cdot
I(z,t)\text{d}z \quad ,
\end{equation}
into which we can enter Equation \ref{eqn:simple_dipole_cur} to
obtain 
\begin{equation}
p(t) =- \bar{n} \bar{\lambda }_{\text{pulse}}
\bar{V}_{\text{spike}}\frac{2 \pi ^2 a^2}{r_L }\frac{v^2 \sigma_n
\sigma_{\text{pulse}} \sigma_{\text{spike}}}{\left(\sigma _n^2+v^2 \left(\sigma
_{\text{pulse}}^2+\sigma _{\text{spike}}^2\right)\right)^{3/2}}\cdot t
\exp\left(\frac{-t^2 v^2}{2 \left(\sigma _n^2+v^2 \left(\sigma _{\text{pulse}}^2+\sigma
_{\text{spike}}^2\right)\right)}\right) \quad .
\end{equation}

The dipole moment has its maximum amplitude at $t_\text{max}=\sqrt{\sigma_n^2+v^2
\left(\sigma _{\text{pulse}}^2+ \sigma _{\text{spike}}^2\right)}/v$, and takes the value
\begin{equation}
p_\text{max} = p(t_\text{max}) = \frac{2 a^2
\pi^2}{r_L\sqrt{e}} \cdot \frac{v \sigma_n \sigma_{\text{pulse}}
\sigma_{\text{spike}} \bar{n} \bar{\lambda}_{\text{pulse}}
\bar{V}_{\text{spike}}} {\left(\sigma_n^2+v^2
\left(\sigma_{\text{pulse}}^2+\sigma_{\text{spike}}^2\right)\right)} \quad ,
\end{equation}

which is presented as Equation \ref{eqn:pmax} in the Results section.

<!--
&=\frac{1}{4\pi\sigma_{e}}\int_{-\infty}^{\infty}\frac{\frac{dn}{dz}(z)\cdot\frac{1}{v}\frac{dV}{dt}(z,t)-n(z)\cdot\frac{1}{v^2}\frac{d^2V}{dt^2}(z,t)}{\sqrt{(z-z')^2 + \rho^2}}\textrm{d}z'

Equation \ref{eqn:infkern} has the form of a convolution with a weighting
function $w$: \begin{equation} w(\rho,z) =
\frac{1}{4\pi\sigma_e}\frac{1}{\sqrt{z^2+\rho^2}} \label{eqn:weighting}
\end{equation}

The convolution can then be written as:

\begin{equation} \Phi(\mathbf{r},t) =
\left[I(z,t)\ast w(\rho,z)\right]_z \end{equation}

with the operator $\left[\cdot\ast\cdot\right]_z$ denoting the convolution with
respect to the variable $z$.
-->

Model fitting to experimental data
----------------------------

In order to relate the model to experimentally obtained data as shown in
[@fig:barnowl], we performed a nonlinear least squares fit, minimizing the mean
squared error $\epsilon$ between the measured potential $\phi_\text{measured}$
and the model prediction $\phi_\text{model}$ in Equations \ref{eqn:simple_field_pot} and \ref{eqn:simple_dipole_cur} for ${N=32}$ measurement locations
$z_n$\ ($n=1,\dots,N$) and ${M=600}$ time points $t_m$ ($m = 1,\dots,M$):
$\epsilon =
\frac{1}{NM}\sum_{n=1}^{N}\sum_{m=1}^{M}\left[\phi_\text{measured}(z_n,t_m)-\phi_\text{model}(z_n,t_m)\right]^2$.
The separation between electrodes was given by the electrode layout as 50\ µm.
The time between sampling points was 5.12\ µs. We achieved the
minimization of the error $\epsilon$ using the "optimize.minimize" routine
provided by the \textsc{SciPy} package [@scipy]. The free parameters to be
determined by the optimization routine were the distance $\rho$, the 
velocity $v$, the number of fibers per unit length $n(z_n)$ for each
measurement location\ $z_n$, and the spatial derivative of the average membrane potential
$\frac{\text{d}}{\text{d}z}V(z_1,t_m)$ at electrode location $z_1$ for each
time point\ $t_m$. We fit the first derivative of the membrane potential in
order to better capture the low-frequency components that we found in
@fig:simpletree E, and because the membrane potential only appears as the
derivative in the model. The derivative of the membrane voltage at the other
locations than $z_1$ was then determined by the traveling-wave assumption: $\frac{\text{d}}{\text{d}z}V(z_n,t_m) =
\frac{\text{d}}{\text{d}z}V(z_1,t_m-\frac{z_n-z_1}{v})$, using a linear interpolation between timepoints.
The model assumption of a single line of axons with electrodes at a fixed
distance is a simplification of a three-dimensional axon tree where the fibers
are distributed at various distances. The distance parameter $\rho$ in Equation \ref{eqn:simple_field_pot} can be
interpreted as an average distance in this simplification.

To aid the convergence of the fit algorithm, an
initial guess for the number of fibers $n(z_z)$ was set by hand.
Initializing the guess to a constant or a fully random number of fibers resulted in
a failure to converge. However, Gaussian-like initial guesses converged
to a single solution, meaning that the specific initial guess did
not alter the final fit result. The results shown in @fig:barnowl were obtained with
an initial guess of a Gaussian with amplitude 12, centered at penetration depth
725 µm with standard deviation 400 µm.

Because of the linearity of Equations \ref{eqn:basic}-\ref{eqn:simple_field_pot}
<!-- dangerous, if equation numbers are changed. Please use \ref instead.
Please check for other cases in manuscript where \ref was not used-->
both in the current $I$ and the
membrane potential $V$, inferring the membrane voltage $V$ from the average
over trials of the EFP $\phi$ produces the average membrane voltage $V$. This
in turn is the membrane voltage response of a single spike convolved with the
peri-stimulus time histogram (PSTH).

Acknowledgements
====
This work was supported by the German Federal Ministry for Education and
Research Grants 01GQ1001A and 01GQ0972, NIH DCD 000436 and US-American
Collaboration in Computational Neuroscience "Field Potentials in the Auditory
System" as part of the NSF/NIH/ANR/BMBF/BSF Collaborative Research in
Computational Neuroscience Program, 01GQ1505A.

The authors wish to thank Anna Kraemer for help with animal handling and surgery; and Martina Michalikova and Tiziano D'Albis for helpful comments on a draft of this manuscript.

<!--
* Show how a dipole emerges in simple case
* Flesh out frequency response
* Can the inverse problem be solved ($v$,$n$,$V$)?

$$\tilde{I}(z,\omega) = i\frac{dn}{dz}(z)\cdot\frac{\omega}{v}\tilde{V}(z,\omega)-n(z)\cdot\frac{\omega^2}{v^2}\tilde{V}(z,\omega)$$
$$\left|\tilde{I}(z,\omega)\right| = \sqrt{\left(\frac{dn}{dz}(z)\right)^2+\left(n(z)\cdot\frac{\omega}{v}\right)^2}\cdot\frac{\omega}{v}\left|\tilde{V}(z,\omega)\right|$$

Todos
=====
- Code
    - check units
    - Model fit
      - set density at border to zero in fit
      - calculate R^2
      - annotate contra/ipsi from labbooks
      - fit many units
      - Inspect cases in which fit doesn't work great
- Results
    - Order of magnitude estimate
- Figures
    - Methods figure
    - Reorder fit figure (C,D)<->(A,B)
- Methods
- Discussion
    - mismatch in conduction velocities
- Abstract

Done
====
- Introduction
    - find more examples in literature
- Code
    - adapt generic bundle params to be more typical
    - make click psth more generic
    - pandoc figure refs
    - implement new simplification
- Figures
    - [@fig:simpletree]
        - caption
        - single axons
            - straight
            - branching
            - terminating
        - compound
        - single axons
            - multibranch
            - endings and snips
        - Figures E and F
          - PSTH
          - CSD
        - better alignment in D
    - [@fig:bigtree]
        - version with MUA
        - lower density of axons
        - Add scalebar for time
        - change color of axis label
        - change color of box
        - add PSTH
        - align zeros in C
        - add contour labels?
    - [@fig:barnowl]
        - redo with new data
    - [@fig:distscaling]
        - add diagrams
        - space between B and C
        - better location for axial scaling
    - [@fig:anamodel]Bb log scale
- Results
    - move forward effect explanation and describe [@fig:simpletree]
    - Page 4 changes
    - much more substantial explanation of [@fig:distscaling]
    - describe differences between barn owl and generic model
    - Add more biological motivation for [@fig:distscaling] normalization
- Methods
    - Adapt analytical model to new method
    - Add simplified explanations of:
        - spatial filtering
        - dipole/stationary potentials
    - relationship to CSD
-->

Bibliography
===

